Blog post announcement of design meeting - draft (#21)
rust-lang/project-ffi-unwind: blogposts/inside-rust/01-announcement.md

less clear-cut than we had assumed.

If the `"C"` ABI does not permit unwinding, a new ABI, called `"C unwind"`,
will be introduced specifically to support unwinding.

## Three specific proposals

The project group has narrowed the design space down to three specific
proposals. Two of these introduce the new `"C unwind"` API, and one does not.

Each proposal specifies the behavior of each type of unwind (Rust `panic!`,
foreign (e.g. C++), and forced (e.g. `pthread` cancel)) when it encounters an
ABI boundary under either the `panic=unwind` or `panic=abort` compile-mode.

### 2 APIs, minimal specification

* `"C"` ABI boundary, `panic=<any>`
  * `panic!`: program aborts
  * forced unwind, no destructors: unwind behaves normally
  * all other foreign unwinding: undefined behavior
* `"C unwind"` ABI boundary
  * With `panic=unwind`: all types of unwinding behave normally
  * With `panic=abort`: all types of unwinding abort the program

### 2 APIs, forced unwinding always permitted

This is the same as the previous design, except that when compiled with
`panic=abort`, forced exceptions would *not* be intercepted; that is, the

> program would not abort.

Reviewer: This should be clarified: would not be intercepted by the "C unwind" ABI.

support unwinding! There are two scenarios that will cause unwinding to occur:

* By default, Rust's `panic!()` unwinds the stack.
* Using FFI, Rust can call functions in other languages (such as C++) that can
  unwind the stack.
  * There are some special cases where C libraries can actually cause
    unwinding.  For instance, on Microsoft platforms, `longjmp` is implemented
    as "forced unwinding" (see below)

Currently, when foreign (non-Rust) code invokes Rust code, the behavior of a
`panic!()` unwind that "escapes" from Rust is explicitly undefined. Similarly,
when Rust calls a foreign function that unwinds, the behavior once the unwind
operation encounters Rust frames is undefined. The primary reason for this is
to ensure that Rust implementations may use their own unwinding mechanism,
which may not be compatible with the platform-provided "native" unwinding
mechanism. Currently, however, `rustc` uses the native mechanism, and there are
no plans to change this.

### Forced unwinding

Platform ABIs can define a special kind of unwinding called "forced unwinding."
This type of unwinding is never supposed to be intercepted by the language

> runtime; so, for instance, C++ destructors should not be invoked.

Reviewer: That is not actually true. Destructors are invoked just fine (as intended), but the language is not supposed to catch the forced unwind.

Reviewer 2: Is it still possible to catch forced unwind, to for example translate to a different unwinding mechanism at the boundary between Rust and C?

Author: Oops. Thank you for the correction, @amanieu.

@bjorn3 Yes, but after the catch block, the unwind will proceed whether or not it is re-thrown.

Reviewer 2: In that case I would prefer forced unwind to be UB, or aborting, so that other unwind mechanisms for Rust code are possible. One I once saw which may have an advantage is compiling the DWARF unwind tables to native code performing the unwinding without interpretation.

Author: @bjorn3 I'm not sure I understand what you're saying. This is the way the platform API _requires_ forced unwinding to work; things like `pthread_exit` and `longjmp`, which we don't want to prohibit, can't behave appropriately without this behavior.

Author: @bjorn3 I'm merging this draft as-is, but there will be a second PR with changes before the blog post is finalized, and then of course there will be the meeting on Monday, so you'll have a few more opportunities to chime in!

There are two common types of forced unwinding:

* On Windows platforms, `longjmp` is implemented as a forced unwind.

> * On UNIX-like platforms, canceling a `phtread` results in a forced unwind.

Reviewer: Typo: pthread. Also I would use `pthread_exit` as an example since that is likely to be more familiar to readers.

Author: Should I state the function name, or just say "exiting or canceling a `pthread`? (Does it matter?)

Reviewer: I would suggest explicitly naming `pthread_exit`.

  * In practice, most "C" functions are never expected to unwind (because they
    are written in C, for example, and not in C++).
    * However, because unwinding is now part of most system ABIs, even C
      functions can unwind -- most notably, `pthread_cancel` can cause all
      manner of C functions to unwind, including common functions like `read`
      and `write`.  (For a complete list, search for "cancellation points" in
      the [pthreads man
      page](http://man7.org/linux/man-pages/man7/pthreads.7.html).)
* Changing the behavior from `-Cpanic=unwind` to `-Cpanic=abort` should not
  cause Undefined Behavior.
  * However, this may not be tenable, or at least not without making binaries
    much larger. See the discussion below for more details.
  * It may, of course, cause programs to abort that used to execute
    successfully. This could occur if a panic would've been caught and
    recovered.

## The primary question: should the `"C"` ABI permit unwinding?

The core question that we would like to decide is whether the `"C"` ABI, as
defined by Rust, should permit unwinding.

This is not a question we expected to be debating. We've long declared that

> unwinding through Rust's `"C" ABI is undefined behavior. In part, this is

Reviewer: Stray backtick `

Author: Ah, that may be why Vim highlighting choked. Thanks for catching it.

because nobody had spent the time to figure out what the correct behavior would
be, or how to implement it, although (as we'll see shortly) there are other
good reasons for this choice. 

In any case, in PR #65646, @Amanieu proposed that we could, in fact, simply
define the behavior of unwinding across `"C"` boundaries. In discussing this,

> discovered that the question of whether the `"C" ABI should permit unwinding was

Reviewer: Stray backtick `

less clear-cut than we had assumed.

If the `"C"` ABI does not permit unwinding, a new ABI, called `"C unwind"`,
will be introduced specifically to support unwinding.

## Three specific proposals

The project group has narrowed the design space down to three specific

> proposals. Two of these introduce the new `"C unwind"` API, and one does not.

Reviewer: "API" should be "ABI". Also a few other places as well.

Each proposal specifies the behavior of each type of unwind (Rust `panic!`,
foreign (e.g. C++), and forced (e.g. `pthread` cancel)) when it encounters an
ABI boundary under either the `panic=unwind` or `panic=abort` compile-mode.

### 2 APIs, minimal specification

* `"C"` ABI boundary, `panic=<any>`

>   * `panic!`: program aborts

Reviewer: Typo? `panic=<any>` causes `panic!` to abort.

  * forced unwind, no destructors: unwind behaves normally
  * all other foreign unwinding: undefined behavior
* `"C unwind"` ABI boundary
  * With `panic=unwind`: all types of unwinding behave normally
  * With `panic=abort`: all types of unwinding abort the program

### 2 APIs, forced unwinding always permitted

This is the same as the previous design, except that when compiled with
`panic=abort`, forced exceptions would *not* be intercepted; that is, the
program would not abort.

### 1 API

* `panic=unwind`: unwind behaves normally
* `panic=abort`:
  * `panic!`: program aborts
  * forced unwind, no destructors: unwind behaves normally

>   * all other foreign unwinding: undefined behavior

Reviewer: My understanding was that any unwinding, whether foreign or forced, is acceptable as long as there are no destructors. It would be helpful in the table to separate "foreign unwinding, destructors" and "foreign unwinding, no destructors".

Author: @Amanieu That wasn't my understanding of the Dropbox Paper doc, but I found it somewhat hard to follow so long after the meeting.

`panic=abort` will not generate landing pads on `"C"` ABI functions. As long as there aren't destructors in those frames, is that sound?

Reviewer: The idea with option 3 is that we don't make any distinction between force unwind and other foreign exceptions: they are all treated the same way.

Reviewer 3: I think the idea was that we'd behave like `-fno-exceptions`, basically, and hence I think I agree with @Amanieu

## Comparison table for the proposed designs

In this table, "UB" stands for "undefined behavior". Some instances of UB can
be detected at runtime, but the code to do so would impose an undesirable
code-size penalty; the group recommends generating such code only for debug
builds. These cases are marked "UB (debug: abort)"

Note that forced unwinding always causes undefined behavior when it traverses
stack frames with destructors.

> |                               | “2 APIs” (Options 1 and 1c), “C”, “panic=unwind” | “2 APIs” (Options 1 and 1c), “C”, “panic=abort” | “2 APIs” (Options 1 and 1c), “C unwind”, “panic=unwind” | “2 APIs, always permit forced” (Option 1), “C unwind”, “panic=abort” | “2 APIs, minimal spec” (Option 1c), “C unwind”, “panic=abort” | “1 API” (Option 3), “panic=unwind” | “1 API” (Option 3), “panic=abort” |

Reviewer: Maybe don't refer to "Option N" here. The term isn't used anywhere else.

Author: Oops. Copy-and-paste holdover.

| ----------------------------- | ------------------------------------------------ | ----------------------------------------------- | ------------------------------------------------------- | -------------------------------------------------------------------- | ------------------------------------------------------------- | ---------------------------------- | --------------------------------- |

> | panic!                        | abort                                            | abort                                           | unwind                                                  | abort                                                                | abort                                                         | unwind                             | aborts                            |

Reviewer: First box should be unwind, not abort.

Author: I don't believe so; part of the reason to introduce a second ABI is to _prevent_ unwinds (even `panic!`s) from crossing `extern "C"` boundaries.

Reviewer: Oh! I got very confused by your use of `panic!`. You're not talking about the behavior of `panic!` itself, you're talking about *an exception generated by `panic!`*. This should be made clearer in the wording.

Also you should use N/A in the table for the panic=abort cases, since `panic!` does not generate an exception in those cases.

Author: That's an excellent point. Yes, the rows are different types of unwinding, so the `panic!` row is indeed for the unwinding operation, not the behavior of `panic!()`.

For `panic=abort`, it seems immaterial to me from a user perspective that the abort occurs before the `panic!()` macro actually starts unwinding the stack; in either case, the behavior is well defined and the ultimate outcome is that the program aborts. But you're right that the difference between "abort and function boundary" and "abort without unwinding" is observable in practice depending on what destructors are executed before the unwind operation reaches (or would reach) an `extern "C"` API boundary.

So perhaps the entries for that column should say something like "aborts without any unwinding"?

Author: I've reworded; it should be clearer.

# Announcing the first FFI-unwind project design meeting

-- Kyle Strand and Niko Matsakis on behalf of the FFI-unwind project group --

The FFI-unwind project group, announced in [this RFC][rfc-announcement], is
working to extend the language to support unwinding that crosses FFI
boundaries.

We have reached our first technical decision point, on a question we have been
discussing internally for quite a while. This blog post lays out the arguments
on each side of the issue and invites the Rust community to join us at the
[upcoming meeting](meeting-link) to help finalize our decision, which will be
formalized and published as our first language-change RFC. This RFC will
propose an "MVP" specification for well-defined cross-language unwinding.

The meeting will be on Monday the 24th at 17:00 UTC, via Zoom:

> Meeting ID: 768 231 760

> > https://mozilla.zoom.us/j/768231760

Reviewer 3: For some reason, I feel uncomfortable posting these details here -- can we just link to the [calendar invite](https://calendar.google.com/event?action=TEMPLATE&tmeid=MjlxdW9kdmRjdHJ1cWVtYWlhc2ZvcXIzcGFfMjAyMDAyMjRUMTcwMDAwWiByZWN1ZDRiOW84Y21jMG01cm1yMDMzcDVua0Bn&tmsrc=recud4b9o8cmc0m5rmr033p5nk%40group.calendar.google.com&scp=ALL) instead?

Author: I can take these out. I already included a link to an "Are We Meeting Yet" page, which has the advantage of not requiring a Google log-in to view. Should I keep that link, or replace it with the invite link?

Author: @nikomatsakis I'm about to merge this as-is, but Amanieu will make a PR with further changes, so once that's open you can weigh in again on which link(s) to include (Google and/or arewemeetingyet).

    as "forced unwinding" (see below)

Currently, when foreign (non-Rust) code invokes Rust code, the behavior of a
`panic!()` unwind that "escapes" from Rust is explicitly undefined. Similarly,
when Rust calls a foreign function that unwinds, the behavior once the unwind
operation encounters Rust frames is undefined. The primary reason for this is
to ensure that Rust implementations may use their own unwinding mechanism,
which may not be compatible with the platform-provided "native" unwinding
mechanism. Currently, however, `rustc` uses the native mechanism, and there are
no plans to change this.

### Forced unwinding

Platform ABIs can define a special kind of unwinding called "forced unwinding."
This type of unwinding operation cannot be stopped prematurely using language
mechanisms such as Rust's `catch_unwind` or C++'s `catch`. (These mechanisms
can intercept forced unwinds, but the runtime will resume unwinding regardless
of the content of the intercepting code, unless the program is aborted).

There are two common types of forced unwinding:

* On Windows platforms, `longjmp` is implemented as a forced unwind.

> * On UNIX-like platforms, `pthread_exit` results in a forced unwind.

Reviewer 4: IIRC
```suggestion
* On UNIX-like platforms, `pthread_exit` and `pthread_cancel` result in a forced unwind.
```

## Requirements for any cross-language unwinding specification

* Unwinding between Rust functions (and in particular unwinding of Rust panics)
  may not necessarily use the system unwinding mechanism
  * In practice, we do use the system mechanism today, but we would like to
    reserve the freedom to change this
* If you enable `-Cpanic=abort`, we are able to optimize the size of binaries
  to remove most code related to unwinding.
  * In extreme cases, it should be possible to remove **all** traces of
    unwinding, when you know that it will not occur.
  * In practice, most "C" functions are never expected to unwind (because they
    are written in C, for example, and not in C++).

>     * However, because unwinding is now part of most system ABIs, even C

Reviewer 3: Does anyone know whether this would be a "forced unwind" in practice? i.e., is this the same as `pthread_exit`? (maybe @gnzlbg or @Amanieu knows?)

Reviewer: Yes, syscall cancellation due to `pthread_cancel` is basically a forced unwind. It is exactly the same mechanism as the one used by `pthread_exit`.

unwinding through Rust's `"C"` ABI is undefined behavior. In part, this is
because nobody had spent the time to figure out what the correct behavior would
be, or how to implement it, although (as we'll see shortly) there are other
good reasons for this choice. 

In any case, in PR #65646, @Amanieu proposed that we could, in fact, simply
define the behavior of unwinding across `"C"` boundaries. In discussing this,
discovered that the question of whether the `"C"` ABI should permit unwinding was
less clear-cut than we had assumed.

If the `"C"` ABI does not permit unwinding, a new ABI, called `"C unwind"`,
will be introduced specifically to support unwinding.

## Three specific proposals

The project group has narrowed the design space down to three specific
proposals. Two of these introduce the new `"C unwind"` ABI, and one does not.

Each proposal specifies the behavior of each type of unwind (Rust `panic!`,
foreign (e.g. C++), and forced (e.g. `pthread_exit`)) when it encounters an
ABI boundary under either the `panic=unwind` or `panic=abort` compile-mode.

### 2 ABIs, minimal specification

* `"C"` ABI boundary, `panic=<any>`

>   * `panic!`: program aborts

Reviewer 3: I found this a bit surprising. I think I expected "UB" here. It seems to me that this implies that under `-Cpanic=unwind` we will add some sort of shim around all "C" calls to catch panics and abort, is that correct?

Reviewer 3: Under `-Cpanic=abort`, of course, we can just abort at the point of panic

Reviewer: Yea I feel this was poorly described (see https://github.com/rust-lang/project-ffi-unwind/pull/21#discussion_r381057844). Basically here we are talking about what happens if an exception generated by `panic!` unwinds to a "C" ABI boundary. This can only happen with `-Cpanic=unwind` since no exception is generated in `-Cpanic=abort`.

Author: Yes, the behavior as I've written it up here would require such shims. I may have misunderstood the proposal from the Paper Doc; I do remember discussing avoiding such shims if possible.

Author: Fixed; discussion here: https://rust-lang.zulipchat.com/#narrow/stream/210922-project-ffi-unwind/topic/weekly.20meeting/near/188664814

  * forced unwind, no destructors: unwind behaves normally
  * all other foreign unwinding: undefined behavior
* `"C unwind"` ABI boundary
  * With `panic=unwind`: all types of unwinding behave normally

>   * With `panic=abort`: all types of unwinding abort the program

Reviewer 3: Hmm, actually, I think this entry strays somewhat from what we had in the doc, right? The "minimal spec" there avoided distinguishing forced unwinding from other kinds of exceptions, which simplified life, but it meant that we couldn't insert helpful shims to catch unwinding and abort, because we couldn't locally tell when unwinding might occur. 

In any case, this setup as described here means that one cannot `longjmp` over a "C unwind" boundary in panic=abort mode, which seems not great. This is why I think we carved out a special case in the paper doc which made "forced unwinding with destructors" UB *even in panic=unwind*.

Reviewer: This is option 1c described in the doc. Option 1 is the one below which carves out the special exception for forced unwinding.

### 2 ABIs, forced unwinding always permitted

This is the same as the previous design, except that when compiled with
`panic=abort`, forced unwinding would *not* be intercepted at `"C unwind"` ABI
boundaries; that is, they would behave normally, without causing the program to
abort. `panic!` and non-forced foreign exceptions would still cause the program
to abort.

### 1 ABI

* `panic=unwind`: unwind behaves normally
* `panic=abort`:
  * `panic!`: program aborts
  * forced unwind, no destructors: unwind behaves normally
  * all other foreign unwinding: undefined behavior

## Comparison table for the proposed designs

In this table, "UB" stands for "undefined behavior". Some instances of UB can
be detected at runtime, but the code to do so would impose an undesirable
code-size penalty; the group recommends generating such code only for debug
builds. These cases are marked "UB (debug: abort)"

Note that forced unwinding always causes undefined behavior when it traverses
stack frames with destructors.

> |                                                         | “2 ABIs”, “C”, “panic=unwind” | “2 ABIs”, “C”, “panic=abort” | “2 ABIs”, “C unwind”, “panic=unwind” | “2 ABIs, always permit forced”, “C unwind”, “panic=abort” | “2 ABIs, minimal spec”, “C unwind”, “panic=abort” | “1 ABI”, “panic=unwind” | “1 ABI”,  “panic=abort” |

Reviewer 3: I think this table would be more readable if we rotated it, so that the *columns* are the kind of unwinding (panic, forced unwind, etc) and the *rows* are the specific scenarios and proposals. It's quite wide as is.

Author: Done! Good suggestion.
